This piece was written by Dr. Luay Nakhleh, chair of the Rice CS Department, as a response to “The Problem With Grades”. Submit your own story here. Read all our stories here.

With all due respect, the student is confused and is confusing other students. I’ll comment on things in an arbitrary order.

I do not think the poster contradicted anything I ever said. Yes, I’m on record saying that Rice students care too much about their GPA. That does not contradict “some companies won’t consider you if your GPA is below a certain threshold.” First, notice the “some” (existential quantifier) in the statement. Second, notice the “below a certain threshold.” Me saying “care too much about their GPA” never meant “it’s fine to have a GPA of 2.0.”

The student says it’s irresponsible (of me) to “simply tell students to take classes …without considering factors like grading,” and proceeds to talk about the choice students would make by taking an “easy A and light workload.” My question to the student is: Why, then, come to a school like Rice, or go to a school like Harvard, MIT, or Princeton? There are literally thousands of universities in the US and hundreds of them give A’s to anyone who has a pulse and, believe me, the courses are light workload. Why not go there?

This gets even more confusing when the student moves on to suggest “for the department to seriously address concerns about grading,” giving “unfair grading” as an example. Low grades in a course and unfair grading are two completely different things. Furthermore, I challenge the student, and any other student in the department, to find a single case where someone brought to my attention unfair grading and I dismissed that as “students care too much about grades.” I’m on record always saying in COMP 182 that I aim for fairness, not for perfection, because I simple can’t achieve the latter (this is not modesty; it’s just impossible to get near perfection with 230 students in the course).

And, then, all this discussion about grades leads the student to recommend “bolder initiatives, like adding tracks, or reducing the total number of credit hours,…” I don’t understand how this conclusion or recommendation follows from “students care too much about their GPA.”

Last but not least, I find it amusing, to say the least, that the student tells students matter-of-factly that their GPAs will matter when they apply for grad school, when I have been a faculty member for 16 years, have reviewed hundreds of grad applications and made admission decisions, and I’m certain he didn’t review a single application nor made a single admission decision. I ask the students in general to please stop making statements like these, because they hurt the students and even worse, they discourage them from applying to grad school. We would admit a student whose GPA is 3.2 but has solid research experience over someone whose GPA is 3.8 and has no research experience. Yes, a GPA of 2.0 is a problem, but I never recommended that GPA.

In an election year, the following question is bound to be asked, hundreds of times: “Are you better off than four years ago?” To me, it’s all about the following: When you walk through the Sallyport on graduation day, are you better off as a scholar and thinker and problem solver than “four years ago?” I do hope the answer is yes, regardless of your grades.

Thank you for speaking up.

Luay